\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename heroes.info
@settitle Heroes Manual
@setchapternewpage odd
@c %**end of header

@c  This is a Texinfo input file (in case it is not obvious from all the
@c  mess around).  The Makefile in the current directory can produce
@c  various output format from this (including .info, .dvi and .html).

@c  Be careful when adding or renaming nodes into this manual.  Texinfo is
@c  a kind of preprocessed language in the sense that it requires that
@c  you preprocess some part of the document before submitting it to Texinfo.
@c  For example the nodes needs to be hard linked together in the input file.
@c  This preprocessing can be done automatically under Emacs' Texinfo mode
@c  after you press the magic key sequence "C-u C-c C-u C-a" (this will
@c  update the menus, the nodes and cramp your fingers).  Users of other
@c  editors have to do this very interesting work manually or can ask Emacs
@c  to do the work.  This can easily be done from the command line:
@c    % emacs --batch --eval '(and (find-file "heroes.texi")
@c                                 (texinfo-all-menus-update t)
@c                                 (save-buffer))'

@include version.texi
@synindex vr cp

@c register Heroes in the info directory
@dircategory Games
@direntry
* Heroes: (heroes).              A Nibbles clone, just better.
* heroeslvl: (heroes)heroeslvl.  Inspect Heroes levels.
@end direntry

@ifinfo
This file documents Heroes, a Nibbles clone, just better.

Copyright 2000, 2001  Alexandre Duret-Lutz

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX
and print the results, provided the printed document
carries a copying permission notice identical to this
one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end ifinfo

@c  This title page illustrates only one of the
@c  two methods of forming a title page.

@titlepage
@title Heroes Manual
@subtitle A Nibbles clone, just better
@author Alexandre Duret-Lutz

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
Copyright 2000, 2001  Alexandre Duret-Lutz

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim
copies of this manual provided the copyright notice and
this permission notice are preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified
versions of this manual under the conditions for
verbatim copying, provided also that the sections
entitled ``Copying'' and ``GNU General Public License''
are included exactly as in the original, and provided
that the entire resulting derived work is distributed
under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute
translations of this manual into another language,
under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a
translation approved by the Free Software Foundation.
@end titlepage

@c ======================================================================
@node Top, Copying, (dir), (dir)
@top Heroes

@ifinfo
This document describes Heroes, a Nibbles clone, just better.

This document applies to Heroes version @value{VERSION}.
@end ifinfo

@menu
* Copying::                     Your rights.
* Overview::                    Heroes in brief and contact information.
* Installation::                Installing Heroes.
* Running::                     Running Heroes.
* heroeslvl::                   Inspect Heroes levels.
* Index::                       A menu covering many topics.

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

Overview of Heroes

* Getting Heroes::              Where to download Heroes from.
* Mailing lists::               Where to talk about Heroes..
* Bug Reporting::               Sending bugs, suggestions, contributions.
* People::                      Contributors
* History::                     History of the DOS version.

Installation of Heroes

* Libraries::                   Libraries Heroes can link with.
* configure::                   Generic configure instructions.
* configure options::           Configure options specific to heroes.
* Relocatable package::         Building a relocatable package.
* Machines::                    Architectures where Heroes is known to work.

Running Heroes

* Invoking heroes::             Heroes launch-time options.
* Environment::                 Environment variables used by Heroes.
* heroesrc::                    Heroes configuration file.
* Global score file::           Sharing a global score file.
* Game::                        Game rules.
* Level editor::                How to create new levels.
* Troubleshooting::             Common problems.

Level editor

* editor-keys::                 Key used in the level editor.
* editor-clicks::               How mouse is used in the editor.
* tunnels::                     How to setup a tunnel.
* sprites::                     How to setup a sprite.
* animations::                  How to setup animations.
* departures::                  How to setup departures.

@samp{heroeslvl}

* Invoking heroeslvl::          heroeslvl launch-time options

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Copying, Overview, Top, Top
@chapter Heroes Copying Conditions
@cindex copying
@cindex rights
@cindex free
@cindex distribution

  Heroes is "free"; this means that everyone is free to use it and free
to redistribute it on a free basis.  Heroes is not in the public domain;
it is copyrighted and there are restrictions on its distribution, but
these restrictions are designed to permit everything that a good
cooperating citizen would want to do.  What is not allowed is to try to
prevent others from further sharing any version of Heroes that they
might get from you.

  Specifically, we want to make sure that you have the right to give
away copies of Heroes, that you receive source code or else can get it
if you want it, that you can change Heroes or use pieces of it in new
free programs@footnote{For instance, this section was stolen from the
documentation of GNU Texinfo.}, and that you know you can do these
things.

  To make sure that everyone has such rights, we have to forbid you to
deprive anyone else of these rights.  For example, if you distribute
copies of Heroes, you must give the recipients all the rights that you
have.  You must make sure that they, too, receive or can get the source
code.  And you must tell them their rights.

  Also, for our own protection, we must make certain that everyone finds
out that there is no warranty for Heroes.  If these programs are
modified by someone else and passed on, we want their recipients to know
that what they have is not what we distributed, so that any problems
introduced by others will not reflect on our reputation.

  The precise conditions of the license for Heroes are found in the
GNU General Public License that accompanies it.

@c ======================================================================
@node    Overview, Installation, Copying, Top
@chapter Overview of Heroes
@cindex  overview
@cindex  Nibbles
@cindex  Tron

Heroes is similar to the "Tron" and "Nibbles" games of yore, but
includes many graphical improvements and new game features.

In it, you must maneuver a small vehicle around a world and
collect powerups while avoiding obstacles, your opponents' trails, and even
your own trail.

There are five game modes available.  Quest is the classical Nibbles, in
Death Match you start with very long tails a must kill your opponents,
in Kill'em All you must run over lemmings moving on the ground, in
Time Cash or Color modes you must collect money or pyramids of color.
Heroes features 12 original sound tracks, 94 levels (in 10 different
tile sets) plus a level editor.

Heroes source code originates from an original MS-DOS game but has been
heavily modified to enhance the portability and some new features have
been added.  MS-DOS support has been lost by the meantime.  The original
MS-DOS version can still be found on the Internet but is unmaintained and
should be considered obsolete.
@c The original MS-DOS source code is not available and will never be.
@c People wanting MS-DOS support are invited to contribute the needed
@c changes to the current develop

The current development focus on cleaning the code and port the game to
available operating systems.  Our objective is to release the version
1.0 as a clean and portable base that would allow further important works
such as network support or programmable vehicles.

@menu
* Getting Heroes::              Where to download Heroes from.
* Mailing lists::               Where to talk about Heroes..
* Bug Reporting::               Sending bugs, suggestions, contributions.
* People::                      Contributors
* History::                     History of the DOS version.
@end menu

@c ======================================================================
@node Getting Heroes, Mailing lists, Overview, Overview
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section  Getting Heroes
@cindex   getting heroes
@cindex   download
@cindex   sunsite
@cindex   metalab
@cindex   ibiblio

@subsection Where to fetch new releases?

Heroes development is powered by the free services offered by
SourceForge to the Open-Source community.  The web page of Heroes is
@uref{http://heroes.sourceforge.net/}.

The latest releases of Heroes is always uploaded to SourceForge and
available from @uref{http://sourceforge.net/projects/heroes/}.  Announces
are sent to the @samp{heroes-announce} mailing list (@pxref{Mailing lists}).

Source code releases are also uploaded to Ibiblio (formerly MetaLab, and
Sunsite)) in @file{/pub/linux/games}; see
@uref{http://ibiblio.org/pub/linux/MIRRORS.html,the Ibiblio mirror list}
to find your nearest mirror.  You will have to wait three or four days
to have the files available on Ibiblio after a release.

A public CVS server is also accessible.  See@*
@uref{http://sourceforge.net/cvs/?group_id=7982} for details.

@subsection What to download?

Heroes is distributed as five packages with independent version
numbering and release schedule.

@table @samp
@item heroes
The source code, info file, and man page.

@item heroes-data
The level data (level maps, sprites, etc.)

@item heroes-sound-tracks
Sound tracks for the game (.xm files).

@item heroes-sound-effects
The sound effects for the game (.wav files).

@item heroes-hq-sound-tracks
High quality sound tracks (.xm files), they will replace some
sound-tracks from @samp{heroes-sound-track}.

@end table

The two first packages are required, the others are optional.

The game has been so split because the data and sound files are big
and don't evolve as often as the code does.  It would therefore be unfair
to bloat the bandwidth by requiring the mirrors and users to download
everything on each release.

@c ======================================================================
@node Mailing lists, Bug Reporting, Getting Heroes, Overview
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Mailing lists.

Three mailing lists are available for you to report bugs, discuss about
the game or get announcements of new releases.

@table @samp
@item heroes-bugs@@lists.sourceforge.net
@cindex heroes-bugs

A public mailing list for bug reports.

@uref{http://lists.sourceforge.net/mailman/listinfo/heroes-bugs, subscription page}.

@item heroes-discuss@@lists.sourceforge.net
@cindex heroes-discuss

A public mailing list for discussion (questions, criticism,
suggestions, contributions, ...) on the game.

@uref{http://lists.sourceforge.net/mailman/listinfo/heroes-discuss, subscription page}.

@item heroes-announce@@lists.sourceforge.net
@cindex heroes-announce

A read-only and low traffic list for announcements of Heroes releases.
Mails posted to this list are also forwarded to @samp{heroes-discuss}
so you don't need to subscribe to both lists.

@uref{http://lists.sourceforge.net/mailman/listinfo/heroes-announce, subscription page}.
@end table


@c ======================================================================
@node     Bug Reporting, People, Mailing lists, Overview
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section  Reporting bugs, sending suggestions or contribution
@cindex   bug
@cindex   bug report
@cindex   suggestions

  We welcome bug reports or suggestions for Heroes (either program,
documentation, or data files).  This program will get better only if you
report the problems you encounter.  Please email them to
@email{heroes-bugs@@lists.sourceforge.net} or
@email{heroes-discuss@@lists.sourceforge.net}.  For bug reports, please
include enough information to reproduce the problem, if possible.
Useful information include:

@itemize @bullet
@item
the version number of Heroes.

@item
hardware, operating system (and OS distribution), and compiler versions.

@item
any unusual options you gave to `configure'.

@item
the actions necessary to reproduce the bug.

@item
a description of the problem (sometimes, a snapshot may be a
good description) and of the behavior you are expecting (this
is not always obvious for everyone)

@item
a trace of the game, as given by running Heroes with the
@samp{HEROES_DEBUG} environment variable set (to @samp{all}, for
instance).

@item
a stack trace of the crash, if you compiled the game with debugging
options (see below).

@item
anything else that you think would be helpful.

@end itemize

  When in doubt whether something is needed or not, include it.  It's
better to include too much than to leave out something important.

@cindex  core dump
  To get useful core dumps, @samp{./configure} with @samp{--enable-debug}
and @samp{--disable-sound}.

@cindex   patch
@cindex   diff
  Patches are most welcome; if possible, please make them with
@samp{diff -u} (@pxref{Unified Format,Unified Format,diff,diff.info,Diff
Manual}) or @samp{diff -c} (@pxref{Context Format,Context
Format,Diff,diff.info,Diff Manual}) and include @samp{ChangeLog} entries
(@pxref{Change Log,Change Log,emacs,emacs-e20,Emacs Manual}).

  When sending email, please do not encode or split the messages in any
way if possible; it's much easier to deal with one plain text message,
however large, than many small ones.

@cindex   contributing
@cindex   TODO

  Do not hesitate to contribute.  This is YOUR game and the GPL allows
you to apply any modifications you want to the game (provided that you
keep those modifications under the GPL).  There are numerous places
where you can contribute: you can hack the code (the TODO file can give
you ideas but should not be seen as a limit), design new levels, create
new drawings (e.g. new sets of tiles), track some new music or add your
personal touch here and there.

@c ======================================================================
@node     People, History, Bug Reporting, Overview
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section  People
@cindex   authors
@cindex   contributors
@cindex   translators
@cindex   packagers

Heroes would not be what it is presently without the following people.

@c START == PEOPLE == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT
@c The following text, up to `END == PEOPLE ==',
@c is AutoGen'ed from ../src/people.def and people.
@unnumberedsubsec Authors
@itemize @bullet
@item
@email{duret_g@@epita.fr,Alexandre Duret-Lutz}

Wrote the original source code, ported it to GNU/Linux
and created a few levels.

@item
@email{rgenevois@@besancon.net,Romual Genevois}

Had the idea of that game, designed most of it,
drew the graphics, created most of the levels.

@item
@email{alex.livernaux@@wanadoo.fr,Alexandre Liverneaux}

Composed the soundtracks.

@item
@email{philmeis@@mail.dotcom.fr,Philippe Meisburger}

Composed the soundtracks and created some levels.

@end itemize

@unnumberedsubsec Contributors
@itemize @bullet
@item
@email{octplane@@via.ecp.fr,Pierre Baillet}

Support for non-8bits depth video mode with LibGGI.

@item
@email{uh1763@@bingo-ev.de,Uwe Hermann}

Clean-ups and portability fixes.

@item
@email{inguin@@gmx.de,Ingo van Lil}

Latin-1 characters in fonts.

@end itemize

@unnumberedsubsec Translators
@itemize @bullet
@item
@email{beckers@@st-oneline.de,Hermann J. Beackers} (German)
@item
@email{joshb@@xs4all.nl,Jos Boersema} (Dutch)
@item
@email{luza.solucao@@uol.com.br,Luzemario Dantas Rocha} (Brazilian Portuguese)
@item
@email{alessandro.dotti@@libero.it,Alessandro Dotti} (Italian)
@item
@email{duret_g@@epita.fr,Alexandre Duret-Lutz} (French)
@item
@email{inguin@@gmx.de,Ingo van Lil} (German)
@end itemize

@unnumberedsubsec Packagers
@itemize @bullet
@item
@email{Daniel_Burrows@@brown.edu,Daniel Burrows} (Debian GNU/Linux)
@item
@email{delvare@@ensicaen.ismra.fr,Jean Delvare} (RPM & Slackware Linux)
@item
@email{eloli@@hotmail.com,Eugenia Loli-Queru} (BeOS)
@item
@email{pixel@@mandrakesoft.com,Pascal Rigaux} (Linux-Mandrake)
@item
@email{sobomax@@FreeBSD.org,Maxim Sobolev} (FreeBSD)
@end itemize

@unnumberedsubsec Porters
@itemize @bullet
@item
@email{S.Denis@@darkworks.com,St@'ephane Denis} (Win/Visual C)
@item
@email{f91-men@@nada.kth.se,Mattias Engdeg@aa{}rd} (Solaris)
@item
@email{sobomax@@FreeBSD.org,Maxim Sobolev} (FreeBSD)
@end itemize
@c END == PEOPLE == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT

More people are listed in the file @file{THANKS} at the top level
of the Heroes tarball.

@c ======================================================================
@node     History,  , People, Overview
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section  History of the DOS version
@cindex   history

The next paragraphs are extracted from the DOS version of Heroes.

We started this game in summer 96. The idea came form Guen.  At this
moment, we were only three: Guen, Toalnkor (now known as Tnk) and me
(Pollux); Alexel joined us one year later.  The development was going
quite slow (it took us two years actually) mainly because of our studies.
Maybe the fact that Guen and me communicated by (snail-)mail was another
slowing down factor.  I sent more than 60 letters to Guen during this two
years !  During the first year, we decided to sell the game.  We made a
demo version (with only 10 levels, no editor, and an order form), and a
CD version (with songs remixed on audio track, but not used in the game).
Our main issue was the price of Midas' license (the sound engine used);
we were also hesitating on the way we should distribute Heroes (shall we
do it shareware or commercial ?).  Finally, after a couple of wasted months
we decided to spread it freeware (Enjoy !), because we thought that no
one would really like to buy such a game today; today where 3D rules.

Now let's talk about the content of the game.  At first, Tnk decided to
make some four channels songs in the old original mod format.  As there
were only two scores done and we were waiting for the next tunes, we used
some songs from Clawz just to vary. These were 'overtaking' and
'hibakusha2' and gave a better taste to the game.  So we removed old
Tnk's songs and he was asked to make some more Clawz-like musics. By the
time, Alexel joined and came with 10 channels XM, thus all tunes are now
8 or 10 channels XM... There were 13 tunes in the game (for a total of
2.88Mb unpacked), these are the intro tune, the menu tune, the 10 levels,
and the end tune (you can't hear the later without finishing the quest
game); most of them have been done by Alexel.

All sprites and pictures were drawn by Guen.  He first made some
level-tiles and a set of hand-done previews of the game before any other
work get started (I guess he has a few other projects at this state of
development at home).  These screens and tiles were used to make the level
editor.  Actually I learned C while making this editor so there is some
piece of code I am not proud of into (and also in the game).  When it was
nearly done, I started to code the game.  The first thing done was the
introduction, and then came the multi-directional scroller.  I remember
that the first level which was loaded was sized 4x4 and wrapped in all
directions; this was very small but at this time there were no tails and
the vehicles were crossing the walls...

Most of the levels were done by Guen. But Tnk and I also did some.
Guen made a cleanup of all the levels we made: some were relegated in
the EXTRALVL directory, other were simply erased. We aimed to spread
the game with 100 of them, but as it is going late and that we are not
going to sell the game anymore I don't know how many levels there will be.

@c ======================================================================
@node    Installation, Running, Overview, Top
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@chapter Installation of Heroes
@cindex installation

@menu
* Libraries::                   Libraries Heroes can link with.
* configure::                   Generic configure instructions.
* configure options::           Configure options specific to heroes.
* Relocatable package::         Building a relocatable package.
* Machines::                    Architectures where Heroes is known to work.
@end menu

@c ======================================================================
@node    Libraries, configure, Installation, Installation
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Needed Libraries
@cindex  libraries
@cindex  libmikmod
@cindex  mikmod
@cindex  libggi
@cindex  ggi
@cindex  libgii
@cindex  gii
@cindex  libsdl
@cindex  sdl
@cindex  allegro
@cindex  Simple DirectMedia Layer

Heroes can be configured to use several libraries to handle display,
sound output and joystick support.  Following is a list of supported
libraries (hopefully you won't have to install all of them but just a
subset).

@itemize @bullet
@item
LibGGI (General Graphic Interface) can be used as a display and keyboard
driver. Get it from @uref{http://www.ggi-project.org/}.

@item
LibGII (General Input Interface) will provide joystick support (the game
can be compiled without).  Get it from
@uref{http://www.ggi-project.org/}.  It is needed by LibGGI, by the way.

@item
SDL can be used as a display and keyboard driver.  Recent revisions will
also provide support for joysticks.  Get it from
@uref{http://www.libsdl.org/}.

@item
Allegro, a game programming library, can be used as a display, keyboard,
and joystick driver.  @uref{http://alleg.sourceforge.net/}.

@item
LibMikMod is a sound library. You don't need it if you want to compile
Heroes without sound support.  Get it from @uref{http://www.mikmod.org/}
or from @uref{ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/linux/apps/sound/libs/}.  If you
install LibMikMod from sources you may want to compile LibMikMod without
Alsa support (@pxref{Troubleshooting}).

@item
SDL_Mixer is an alternative sound engine that can be used only if you
use SDL as display driver. You don't need it if you want to compile
Heroes without sound support.  Get it from
@uref{http://www.devolution.com/~slouken/SDL/projects/SDL_mixer/}.

@end itemize

To summarize, install at least LibGGI, SDL, or Allegro to get video
output and keyboard handling.  Install LibGII to get joystick support,
unless you use a recent SDL or Allegro.  And install LibMikMod (or
SDL_mixer if you have SDL) if you want sound output.

My personal preference goes to LibGGI/LibGII and LibMikMod which give
you more control over the drivers used.  On the other hand, SDL seems
better at doing full screen display and is maintained actively.  Allegro
is quite new on Unix.

Heroes also supports memory debugging libraries, such as @samp{dmalloc} or
@samp{efence}.  See the @samp{--enable-mem-debug} option in section
@ref{configure options}.

@c ======================================================================
@node    configure, configure options, Libraries, Installation
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section configure generic instructions
@cindex  configure generic instructions

To be filled.

@c ======================================================================
@node    configure options, Relocatable package, configure, Installation
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section configure options for Heroes
@cindex  configure options for Heroes

@samp{configure} will do its best to find the libraries and functions
needed by the game.  Still, you may give several options to
@samp{configure} to help it, or to fine tune special features of Heroes.

@table @samp
@item --enable-html-doc[=DIR]
@cindex --enable-html-doc[=DIR]
Build and install html documentation in directory @samp{DIR}.
If @samp{DIR} is not given, install in @file{$datadir/heroes/doc}.

@item --disable-sound
@cindex --disable-sound
Turn off sound support. Sound is enabled by default,
unless no sound engine is found).

@item --disable-joystick
@cindex --disable-joystick
Do not include joystick support in the game.  Joystick support is enabled
by default, unless you don't have GII or joystick support in SDL.

@item --with-sdl[=DIR]
@cindex --with-sdl
Specify that you want to link with SDL.  This is the default if LibGGI is
not installed.  If you installed SDL in some non-standard place, you can
specify the installation path as an argument.  For example:
@example
./configure --with-sdl=/home/adl/usr
@end example
@samp{configure} will then look for @file{/home/adl/usr/bin/sdl-config}
and configure Heroes accordingly.

@item --with-ggi[=DIR]
@cindex --with-ggi
Link with LibGGI.  This is the default if LibGGI is installed.
If you installed LibGGI in some non-standard place, you can
specify the installation path as an argument

@item --with-allegro[=DIR]
@cindex --with-allegro
Link with Allegro.  This is the default is neither LibGGI not SDL can be
used.  If you installed Allegro in some non-standard place, you can
specify the installation path as an argument

@item --with-mikmod[=DIR]
@cindex --with-mikmod
Use LibMikMod four sound output.  This is the default if LibMikMod is
installed and LibGGI have been selected.  You may specify where
LibMikMod is installed using the optional argument.

@item --with-sdl-mixer[=DIR]
@cindex --with-sdl-mixer[=DIR]
Use SDL_mixer for sound output.  This is the default if SDL_mixer is
installed and SDL has been selected.  You may specify where SDL_mixer is
installed using the optional argument.  Using this option implies
@samp{--with-sdl}.

@item --disable-heroes-debug
@cindex --disable-heroes-debug
@cindex HEROES_DEBUG
Turn off tracing support.  See the description of the @samp{HEROES_DEBUG}
variable (@pxref{Environment}).  This is enabled by default to facilitate
bug reporting.  Using this options should reduce the size of the
resulting binary, and speed up the game by an indiscernible amount.

@end table

The following options are for developing purpose.  The default
configuration should be suitable for end users (i.e. players) but people
attempting to hack the code may want debugging symbols or compiler
warnings.

@table @samp
@item --enable-debug
@itemx --disable-debug
@cindex --enable-debug
@cindex --disable-debug
This is a three state option.  The default is to compile with debugging
symbols: this produce bigger binaries but allow to get helpfull
coredumps, without slowing down the game.  You may want to use
@samp{--enable-debug} to include more debugging data and turn on some
debugging code.  Use @samp{--disable-debug} to turn this off.
Translators: you @emph{do want} to turn this option on, really!  Because
the debugging code includes some checks on the translated messages.

@item --disable-optimizations
@cindex --disable-optimizations
Turn off compiler optimizations options.  This can ease debugging.
If you want to supply your own optimizations options, use
something like @samp{--enable-optimizations='-O3 -march=pentium'}.

@item --enable-warnings
@cindex --enable-warnings
Try to turn on a large bunch of compiler warnings.

@item --enable-assert
@cindex --enable-assert
Turn on some assertions squattered over the source code.
This can slow down things a bit.

@item --enable-devel
@cindex --enable-devel
Is a shorthand for @samp{--enable-debug --disable-optimizations --enable-warnings --enable-assert}.

@item --with-mpatrol
@cindex --with-mpatrol
@cindex mpatrol
Link with MPatrol, a @samp{malloc()} debugger.

@item --with-mtrace
@cindex --with-mtrace
@cindex mtrace
Use GNU libc's @samp{mtrace()} facility to check @samp{malloc()} usage.

@item --with-dmalloc
@cindex --with-dmalloc
@cindex dmalloc
Link with Dmalloc, a @samp{malloc()} debugger.

@item --with-efence
@cindex --with-efence
@cindex efence
Link with Electric Fence, a @samp{malloc()} debugger.

@item --enable-mem-debug
@cindex --enable-mem-debug
Check for @samp{mtrace()}, Dmalloc, or Electric Fence.  Use the first found.

@item --enable-gprof
@cindex --enable-gprof
@cindex gprof
Enable profiling support with @samp{gcc}, you need @samp{gprof} to
inspect the file resulting from a run of Heroes.

@item --disable-display
@cindex --disable-display
This disable all screen output, making the game rather unplayable.
This suppress decencies over third party libraries like GGI or SDL,
therefore you may find it useful with some debugging tools like
checkergcc.

@end table

@c ======================================================================
@node    Relocatable package, Machines, configure options, Installation
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@section Building a relocatable package
@cindex relocation

@dfn{Relocation} refers to the ability to install or move the
game in a directory which is different from the one it has been configured
for.  This usually happens if you create a binary package for Heroes and
don't know in advance where the user will unpack it.  This section
describe how Heroes find for his files, in order to allow relocatable
packages.  Most people don't need to read this section, only packagers
might be interested.

The values of the @samp{./configure} options you used to specify
directories (such as @samp{--prefix}, @samp{--bindir}, or
@samp{--datadir}) are all transformed into paths relative to
@var{prefix} and then hardcoded into the Heroes binary.  Because
Heroes uses only paths relative to @var{prefix}, the relocation
process is just a matter of guessing the correct value of @var{prefix}
at runtime.  This guess is done using various informations
available: first the original value of @var{prefix} is tried, then
@var{prefix} is computed from the path to the current binary
(@code{argv[0]}) when available, then the content of the environment
variable @samp{PATH} is used to find the binary and derive @var{prefix},
finally Heroes assumes it is running from the @var{bindir} directory.
The whole process is not garanteed to succeed, but you can also
override those paths with some enivronment variables (@pxref{Environment}).

@c ======================================================================
@node    Machines,  , Relocatable package, Installation
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@section Machines
@cindex machines
@cindex architecture

Heroes has been reported to compile and run on the following
architectures.  Since Heroes can use SDL, GGI, or Allegro as display
driver, the following list shows the driver which was used.

@table @asis
@item Linux/i386 (GGI, SDL, or Allegro)
Should build out of the box.  Packages for some Linux distributions
are available from the web pages.

@cartouche
Suse 7.1 users, the libc shipped with your distribution (glibc-2.2-7)
will crash every time Heroes calls the @code{ngettext()} function.  The
workaround is to configure Heroes with @samp{configure
--with-included-gettext} so that it uses its own version of
@code{ngettext()}.
@end cartouche

@cartouche
Red Hat 7.0 users, the compiler shipped with your distribution (packaged
as @samp{gcc-2.96-54.i386.rpm}) is an experimental version which is
still @emph{bugged} despite the pile of fixes applied.  It actually
produces unfaithful code for Heroes, so please use another compiler.
Either upgrade to a newer version (@samp{gcc-2.96-64.i386.rpm} is known
to work) or use the one provided by the @samp{kgcc} package.
@end cartouche

@item Linux/m68k (SDL)
Is reported to work when the sound (@samp{SDL_mixer}) is disabled
(@samp{configure --disable-sound} or @samp{heroes -S}).  Any feedback on
this issue is welcome.  See also the @file{BUGS} file.

@item FreeBSD (SDL)
Should build out of the box.
Packages are available from the web pages.

@item Solaris (SDL)
Should build out of the box.

@item Win32/MinGW32 (SDL)
Can be cross-compiled (native compilation untested).  The script used to
cross build the Heroes package available on the web page is in the
subdirectory @file{arch/mingw32}.

@item Win32/VisualC (SDL)
See the files in the @file{arch/VisualC} subdirectory of the Heroes CVS
tree.  We used to distribute these files along with the rest of the
sources, but stopped because they are now completely out-of-date (they
have not been updated since version 0.7).  However you can use them as a
start point if you think about compiling Heroes with MSVC.

@item Digital Unix (GGI)
Should build out of the box.

@item NetBSD (SDL)
I had to tweak SDL 1.1.6 to get it working, and also force Heroes'
configure to use the result of @samp{sdl-config --static-libs} instead
of @samp{sdl-config --libs}.  Both issues should be fixed today (FIXME:
need to check).

@item OpenBSD 2.9 (GGI & SDL)
It looks like some configure hints need to be given when using either libs.

A build of Heroes configured with GGI will apperently complete
successfully, however the resulting binary fails to load, with the
dynamic loader complaining about a missing symbol from libpthread.  So
you'd rather configure Heroes with
@example
./configure --with-ggi=/usr/local LDFLAGS=-pthread
@end example
Then Heroes appears to work fine.

If you prefer to use SDL, things are different. I had to configure Heroes with
@example
./configure --with-sdl=/usr/local LDFLAGS=-L/usr/X11R6/lib X11BASE=/usr/X11R6
@end example
Unfortunately, the resulting binary froze when initializing SDL (in
@samp{SDL_init()}).  Please send us a note if you are luckier.
FIXME: Look how other packages using SDL are built, I'm probably missing
something.

@item IRIX 6.5 (SDL)
Heroes 0.7 has been reported to compile and run with SDL 1.1.3 and
@samp{gcc} + libraries from @samp{freeware.sgi.com} on IRIX 6.5.

@item BeOS (SDL)
Heroes 0.9 has been reported to compile and run out of the box.

@end table

If you got Heroes working on a platform which is not listed here, please
send a notice to @email{heroes-discuss@@lists.sourceforge.net}.

@c ======================================================================
@node    Running, heroeslvl, Installation, Top
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@chapter Running Heroes
@cindex running

@menu
* Invoking heroes::             Heroes launch-time options.
* Environment::                 Environment variables used by Heroes.
* heroesrc::                    Heroes configuration file.
* Global score file::           Sharing a global score file.
* Game::                        Game rules.
* Level editor::                How to create new levels.
* Troubleshooting::             Common problems.
@end menu

@c ======================================================================
@node    Invoking heroes, Environment, Running, Running
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section @samp{heroes} options
@cindex  options
@cindex  runtime options

Heroes call be launched with various options.

@table @samp
@item -v
@itemx --version
@cindex -v
@cindex --version
Display Heroes version number and copyright informations.

@item -h
@itemx --help
@cindex -h
@cindex --help
Print a help message about these run-time options.

@item -q
@itemx --quiet
@cindex -q
@cindex --quiet
Disable warning messages.  This can be useful on platform
such as Windows were such messages will pop up a text window.

@item -Q
@itemx --really-quiet
@cindex -Q
@cindex --really-quiet
Same as @samp{-q}, but disable error messages too.

@item -vOPTIONS
@itemx --verbose=CHANNELS
@cindex -vOPTIONS
@cindex --verbose=CHANNELS
Enable debugging output.  @samp{CHANNELS} can take the same
values as @samp{HEROES_DEBUG} (@pxref{Environment}).

@item -lWORD
@itemx --list=WORD
@cindex -lWORD
@cindex --list=WORD

Show various internal information.  @samp{WORD} can be @samp{debug},
@samp{levels}, @samp{preferences}, @samp{resources},
@samp{sound-drivers}, or @samp{sound-tracks}.

@samp{--list=debug} will list the available debugging channel, to be used
with @samp{--verbose} or @samp{HEROES_DEBUG} (@pxref{Environment}).

@samp{--list=levels} displays the list of installed levels (only the
game levels, not the extra levels).

@samp{--list=sound-drivers} is used to print LibMikMod's drivers list.
The expected output is something like this:
@example
% heroes --list=sound-drivers
LibMikMod version 3.1.7

Available drivers:
 1 Enlightened sound daemon (EsounD) driver v0.2.12
 2 Advanced Linux Sound Architecture (ALSA) driver v0.3.2
 3 Open Sound System driver v1.5
 4 Raw disk writer (music.raw) v1.1
 5 Wav disk writer (music.wav) v1.2
 6 Piped Output driver v0.1
 7 Standard output driver v1.1
 8 Nosound Driver v3.0
@end example

@samp{--list=resources} will dump the list of file resources.  File
resources are kinds of aliases used internally to name files and
directories.  They can be overwritten in you configuration file using
the @samp{setrsc:} command.  This command will also list the original
(default) value of the resource if it has been overwritten.

@samp{--list=sound-tracks} will print the list of sound-tracks used
in the game in a format compatible with the @samp{soundconf:} command
(@pxref{heroesrc}).

@samp{--list=preferences} will print the preferences and their values,
as they would be saved in @file{~/.heroes/preferences}.

@comment sound options:

@item -d N[,OPTIONS]
@itemx --driver=N[,OPTIONS]
@cindex -d N[,OPTIONS]
@cindex --driver=N[,OPTIONS]
@cindex sound driver
With LibMikMod, specify the driver to use. @samp{N} is the number of the
driver taken from the output of @samp{heroes --list=sound-drivers}. Use
@samp{0} for auto-detection.  Additional options can be given to the
driver, see LibMikMod's @file{README} file.

With SDL_mixer, override some audio parameters.  @samp{freq} and
@samp{buffers} are the two recognized parameters.  Example
@example
heroes -d freq=11050:buffers=512
@end example

@item -S
@itemx --no-sound
Disable sound output completely (both sound tracks and sound effects).

@item -X
@itemx --no-sfx
Disable sound effects only.

@item -m
@itemx --mono
@cindex -m
@cindex --mono
Output sound in one single channel.  This has no effect if the game is
compiled without sound support, of course.

@item -8
@itemx --8bits
@cindex -8
@cindex --8bits
Output sound in 8bits, rather than 16.  You will need this option if you
have an old sound card that can't play 16bits samples.

@item -i
@itemx --high-quality
@cindex -i
@cindex --high-quality
When compiled with MikMod, use the high quality software mixer.  This
mixer is somewhat more expensive, but you can expect a better sound
quality.  When compiled with SDL_mixer, output sound in 44kHz instead
of 22kHz.

@comment display options

@item -G OPTIONS
@itemx --gfx-options=OPTIONS
@cindex -G OPTIONS
@cindex --gfx-options=OPTIONS
@cindex target.txt
@vindex GGI_DISPLAY
@vindex SDL_VIDEODRIVER
@cindex display driver
Give additional options to the display driver.

With GGI applications, the usual way to force the selection of a driver
is to define the @samp{GGI_DISPLAY} environment variable.  The usage and
possible values of this variable are documented in the file
@file{target.txt} which comes with LibGGI.  If Heroes has been compiled
with GGI, the option @samp{-G} will bypass the setting of
@samp{GGI_DISPLAY}, as if the variable was overwritten.  For instance
@example
% heroes -G 'tile:0,0,160,200,(x):160,0,160,200,(x)'
@end example
is equivalant to
@example
% export GGI_DISPLAY='tile:0,0,160,200,(x):160,0,160,200,(x)'
% heroes
@end example
except that the former does not modify @samp{GGI_DISPLAY}.  (BTW, the
above setting uses GGI's tile driver to display Heroes in two
half-windows... this maybe quite fun to try in two player mode.)

It is also possible to prevent Heroes' GGI driver to request a 8 bit
mode with @samp{-G not8}.  This is necessary on some uncommon X setup
to workaround a bug in GGI (@pxref{Troubleshooting}).  Other legitimate
GGI settings maybe supplied after a colon, as in @samp{-G not8:x}.

As SDL applications are concerned, selection of the video driver is
achieved through the @samp{SDL_VIDEODRIVER} environment variable.  At
the time of writting this is not documented in SDL, so you will have to
either RTFS or guess the possible values.  If Heroes has been compiled
with SDL, the option @samp{-G} with override the setting of
@samp{SDL_VIDEODRIVER}.  For instance you could force SDL to use
the X11 driver with
@example
% heroes -G x11
@end example
or
@example
% export SDL_VIDEODRIVER=x11
% heroes
@end example

@item -F
@itemx --full-screen
@cindex -F
@cindex --full-screen
@cindex full screen
If Heroes is compiled with SDL, this option will turn on full screen mode.

Otherwise, if Heroes is compiled with GGI, this option will allow Heroes
to use a video mode with any size; i.e., the video surface is not
constrained to 320x200 and Heroes will just center its 320x200 output.
The rational is that GGI's DGA driver doesn't switch video modes.  So
unless your X server run in 320x200 it would be hard to use the DGA
driver otherwise.  Here is the typical settings for ``full-screen'' DGA
output:
@example
% heroes -G dga -F
@end example
Admittedly the name of @samp{--full-screen} is quite misleading here
since this option can provide you with a 320x200 stamp centered on your
1600x1200 display...

@item -2
@itemx --double
@cindex -2
@cindex --double
@cindex stretching
Stretch the game twofold before blitting to screen.  This is slow.

@item -3
@itemx --triple
@cindex -3
@cindex --triple
@cindex stretching
Stretch the game threefold before blitting to screen.  This is even slower.

@item -4
@itemx --quadruple
@cindex -4
@cindex --quadruple
@cindex stretching
Stretch the game fourfold before blitting to screen.  This has been
requested by people which can run @samp{heroes -3} smoothly.

@item -e
@itemx --even-lines
@cindex -e
@cindex --even-lines
@cindex stretching
Display only even lines, leaving blank scan lines
as on real arcade monitors.  This will contribute to make
options @samp{-2}, @samp{-3} and @samp{-4} faster.

@comment miscellaneous options

@item --cpu-off
@cindex --cpu-off
Disable computer opponents driving.  The opponents are still there
(there will always be four players) but they are no more driven: they
turn when they hit wall.  You won't want to use this options, it is here
for historical reason: when the game was started in 1996 this used to
suppress some overhead on slow machines.

@item --default-scores
@itemx --default-options
@itemx --default-saves
@cindex --default-scores
@cindex --default-options
@cindex --default-saves
Don't read the corresponding file, but use default value instead.
The files will be saved at the end of the game anyway, so you can
use these options to revert the default value of the given file.
Another way to do this is simply to delete the file, it will be
created the next time Heroes run.

@item -s
@itemx --swap-sides
@cindex -s
@cindex --swap-sides
Swap sides when playing in two player mode.  The default is to have
player one on the right and player two on the left, because the default
key bindings use the arrows for player one and left letters keys for
player two.

@item --no-double-fx
@cindex --no-double-fx
Disable superposition of rotozoom and waves.  This is also a prehistoric
option.  These two visual effects lead to a small overhead that one may
not want to combine on a slow host.

@item -g
@itemx --go
@cindex -g
@cindex --go
Skip the game introduction, start right on the main menu.

@item -J
@itemx --no-joystick
@cindex -J
@cindex --no-joystick
Disable joystick handling.  Most of the time you will use this because
you don't have a joystick and are annoyed by the warning message output
when heroes start.

@end table

@c ======================================================================
@node    Environment, heroesrc, Invoking heroes, Running
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Environment variables
@cindex  environment

@subsection @samp{HEROES_DEBUG}
@cindex @samp{HEROES_DEBUG}

The very first action of Heroes when it starts is to look the
environment for a @samp{HEROES_DATA_DIR} variable.  If Heroes has been
compiled with the @samp{--enable-heroes-debug} configure option (which
is the default), this variable specify the kind of debug messages that
should be printed out.  Possible values are the following (they can
be printed using the @samp{--list=debug} option).

@c START == DEBUGCHN == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT
@c The following text, up to `END == DEBUGCHN ==',
@c is AutoGen'ed from ../src/debugchn.def and debugchn.

@table @samp
@item SECTION
The different parts of the game (introduction,
demonstration, menus, ...).

@item SYSTEM
Handling of environment variables, creation of
directories, initialization of libraries.

@item RESOURCE
Filename Resources Handling.

@item FILE
Files And Directories Handling.

@item LEVEL
Levels Handling.

@item SOUND_TRACK
Sound Track Events.

@item SOUND_EFFECT
Sound Effects Events.

@item VIDEO
Events related to the display interface.

@item JOYSTICK
Joystick Initialization And Events.

@item TIMER
Timer Handling.

@item MISC
Miscellaneous Events.

@item FADER
Palette Fade Events.

@item BONUS
Bonus handling.

@item ALL
All of the above.
@end table
@c END == DEBUGCHN == DO NOT CHANGE THIS COMMENT

Multiple values can be separated by @samp{:}, and a value is negated if
prefixed by @samp{-}.  For example the following command line sets
@samp{HEROES_DEBUG} so that all messages get printed except those
related to timer handling.

@example
export HEROES_DEBUG=all:-timer
@end example

@subsection @samp{HEROES_PREFIX}
@cindex @samp{HEROES_PREFIX}

The @samp{HEROES_PREFIX} indicate the base directory where
Heroes was installed.  It is equivalant to the @samp{--prefix}
option of @samp{configure}.  This variable is not found the default prefix
(configured at build time) will be used, usually this is something
like @samp{/usr/local} or @samp{/usr}.
Type @samp{heroes --list=resources | grep prefix} to
see the value actually used by Heroes.

Most people don't need to set this variable.  This is only useful if
you got Heroes as a binary distribution and want to move files around.

@subsection @samp{HEROES_DATA_DIR}
@cindex @samp{HEROES_DATA_DIR}

The @samp{HEROES_DATA_DIR} variable may specify the path were the data
files are located.  It thus allows you to relocate the data file.  If
this variable is not found the default path (configured at build time)
will be used.  Run @samp{heroes --list=resources | grep data-dir} to
see the value actually used by Heroes.

The path to datafiles is adjusted automatically if you set
@samp{HEROES_PREFIX} (because it is a subdirectory of
@samp{HEROES_PREFIX}), so most people don't need to set
@samp{HEROES_DATA_DIR}.

@subsection @samp{HEROES_LOCALE_DIR}
@cindex @samp{HEROES_LOCALE_DIR}

The @samp{HEROES_LOCALE_DIR} variable override the path were the message
catalogs are looked for.  The default value is hardcoded into the
Heroes binary, and you can see it if you run
@samp{heroes --list=resources | grep locale-dir}.

As for @samp{HEROES_DATA_DIR}, changing @samp{HEROES_PREFIX}
is usually enough because @samp{HEROES_LOCALE_DIR} is a subdirectory
of @samp{HEROES_PREFIX}.

@subsection @samp{HOME}
@cindex @samp{HOME}

The @samp{HOME} variable is used to locate your home directory.
You can also use @samp{HEROES_HOME}.

@c ======================================================================
@node    heroesrc, Global score file, Environment, Running
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section @file{~/.heroes/heroesrc}
@cindex  heroesrc

Each time you start heroes, it tries to read the system-wide
configuration file @file{heroesrc} (in the @file{$datadir/heroes/etc/}
directory) and from the @file{~/.heroes/heroesrc} in your home
directory.

@subsection @samp{option:}
@cindex options

You can specify options in that file, they will be processed before any
options given on the command line.  Put the word @samp{Options:} in
front of a line, and write the options after (separated by spaces, as on
the command line, except that there is no quoting or variable
substitution).  For example, if you want that Heroes always skip the
introduction, and swap the player sides, add the following line to your
@file{~/.heroes/heroesrc}:

@example
Options: -g -s
@end example

Multiple @samp{Options:} lines can be given, they are processed in order.

@subsection @samp{setenv:}
@cindex setenv
@vindex SDL_VIDEODRIVER
@cindex environment variable
@cindex variable
You can also have line starting with @samp{setenv:}, followed by a
variable name and a value (the rest of the line, after the variable name
is taken as the value).  This will setup the corresponding environment
variable.  This provide a way to configure the used libraries.  For example, to
instruct SDL to use its DGA driver, use the following line:
@example
setenv: SDL_VIDEODRIVER dga
@end example

This may seam redundant with @samp{--gfx-options} and @samp{--driver} but
can be used to configure other libraries.  For example, setup GGI or SDL to
use AAlib (the ASCII art rendering library) and configure AAlib via its
@samp{AAOPTS} variable.

@subsection @samp{extradir:}
@cindex extradir
@cindex extra levels directory

Lines starting with @samp{extradir:} are used to specify
additional extra levels directories.

@subsection @samp{soundconf:}
@cindex soundconf

The @samp{soundconf:} lines are used to introduce configuration files
defining the sound tracks played by the game.  The format of such files
is as follow:
@example
ALIAS:FILENAME:TITLE:AUTHOR
...
@end example
Where @samp{ALIAS} is the name of the sound track used internally by
Heroes, @samp{FILENAME} is the filename of the sound track
you want to be loaded, @samp{TITLE} is the title of the sound track, and
@samp{AUTHOR} is the person who tracked that music.

You may give several definitions for the same alias, in which case only
the latest will be used (and of course your configuration file is read
after heroes has setup its default aliases so you can overwrite them).

Presently the set of used aliases include
@samp{INTRO},@samp{MENU},@samp{HEROES01},@samp{HEROES02},...,@samp{HEROES10},
and @samp{ENDSCROLL}.  You can overwrite them, but you can also define
your own aliases: they will be available in the jukebox menu.

To give one full example, imagine you want to hear
@samp{/music/2nd-reality.s3m} when you are playing Heroes in
the second world (desert and pyramids).  What you do is this
@example
% cd ~/.heroes
% echo "HEROES02:/music/2nd-reality.s3m:\
Second Reality:Purple Motion" > mymod
% echo "soundconf: /home/adl/.heroes/mymod" >> heroesrc
@end example

In this example, the configuration file has been put in the @samp{~/.heroes}
directory but you can put it anywhere provided the filename given after
@samp{soundconf:} points to it.

All that sound configuration stuff should allow you to make drop-in
replacement for heroes modules.  You just make a set of modules
available with a configuration file that any user can get read from its
@samp{~/.heroes/heroesrc}.

You can run @samp{heroes --list=sound-tracks} to print the list of
sound-tracks used by heroes, and hence verify the correctness of your
configuration.

@subsection @samp{setrsc:}
@cindex setrsc
@cindex file resources

This follow the same format as @samp{setenv} but is used to overwrite
some filenames used by the game.  Heroes internally handles file or
directory names using name aliases called file resources whose values (actual
filenames) can be overwritten by @samp{setrsc} and are subject to variable
expansion.

The command @samp{heroes --list=resources} will list all the resources
used by the game.  @samp{data-dir} is a special resource which content
is setup from the @samp{HEROES_DATA_DIR} environment variable, or from
the path used to install the files when the game was
built. @samp{home-dir} is initialized from the @samp{HOME} environment
variable.

An example of @samp{setrsc:} usage is to run the game with an alternate
picture file.  Say you are working on a modified version of the main font
used in the game, you can override the installed picture by yours with
the following line.

@example
setrsc: main-font /home/adl/heroes-dev/tmp/fontem.pcx
@end example

@subsection @samp{keepsgid:} and @samp{keepsuid:}
@cindex keepsgid
@cindex keepsuid
@cindex suid
@cindex sgid

By default, if Heroes has a sgid-bit or suid-bit, it will drop
all privileges once the score and saved games are open.  This
happens before the user configuration is read, and therefore before
the display and sound are initialized.

Sometime you do not want these privileges to be dropped because
your setup requires them.  For instance your display driver might
require read/write access to /dev/mem, or a similar requirement may
exist for the sound library).

@samp{keepsgid: yes} and @samp{keepsuid: yes} can be used to instruct
Heroes to keep the s-bit privileges for its whole life.  These commands
can only be used in the system-wide configuration file.

@c ======================================================================
@node     Global score file, Game, heroesrc, Running
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section  Sharing a global score file
@cindex suid
@cindex sgid

In its default configuration, Heroes will create a score file in each
user's directory.  However you may want to share a global score file for
many users.  This can easily be done by redefining the filename used by
Heroes to read and write the score file.  This filename is a resource,
so it can be overwritten in an @file{heroesrc} configuration file.

If you are the installer of Heroes, you can do this from the
system wide @file{heroesrc} with a line like the following
@example
setrsc: score-file $(sys-dir)/scores
@end example

The same considerations apply to saved games (@samp{saved-games-file}).

@samp{$(sys-dir)} is another resource the value of which defaults
to @samp{/var/games/heroes}.  According to the Filesystem Hierarchy
Standard this is the place where you should store modifiable game files.
If you need to change this, simply add another @samp{setrsc:} line:
@example
setrsc: sys-dir /site/var/games/heroes
@end example
By the way, you will have to create the @samp{$(sys-dir)} directory
yourself, because Heroes is not smart enough (and probably doesn't have
the right to create that directory anyway).

Now you have to make several choices regarding the policy for granting
access to that file.  This is a global score files, so you need to devise
a setup which allows Heroes to write that file whoever run the game.
The most straightforward way to allow this is to create the @file{scores} file
with @samp{666} permission... you probably don't want to do this because
everybody would be allowed to damage the file.

A cleaner idea is to create a special user or group to own that file,
and grant @samp{heroes} the appropriate rights (set-user-id or
set-group-id).  Setting @samp{heroes} as a set-user-id program is
a security problem, because if someone manage to get @samp{heroes} to execute
arbitrary code, he can have the game overwriting itself.  So the correct
solution is to set @samp{heroes} as a set-group-id program, and make the
score file writable only by that group.  At worse, if someone manage
to break into @samp{heroes}, s/he will only be able to damage the
score file.

Here is a sample setup where @samp{heroes} is configured as a
set-group-id program for a group called `@samp{games}':
@example
% cd /usr/games && ls -l heroes
-r-xr-sr-x    1 root     games     2074633 Mar 25 22:29 heroes
% cd /var/games/heroes && ls -la
drwxr-xr-x    2 root     games        4096 Mar 25 22:35 ./
drwxr-xr-x    4 root     root         4096 Mar 25 19:59 ../
-rw-rw-r--    1 root     games        2291 Mar 25 22:35 scores
@end example
Note that @file{/var/games/heroes} is not writable by group @samp{games},
so you have to create the file @samp{scores} before Heroes can use it.

When @samp{heroes} is run as a set-group-id or set-user-id program, it
executes some code to drop this privilege whenever possible.  Basically,
it will revert its effective-group-id and effective-user-id to the
player's group-id and user-id on startup and only switch back to it's
file-group-id and file-user-id when it needs to write to a file in the
@samp{$(sys-dir)} directory.  This is what the @samp{$(sys-dir)}
resource is for: a file which is beyond that directory is opened with
the file-group&user-id (i.e. group `games' in the above example), any
other file is opened using the player's group(s) and user-id.  The
visible consequence is that files created in the @samp{~/.heroes}
directory won't be owned by group @samp{games} (or whatever you chose).

Finally, note that Heroes does keep track of how a resource has been
setup, and wont switch persona when @samp{$(sys-dir)} or
@samp{$(score-file)} has been setup in a non-trusted way.  Roughly,
all hard-coded and system-wide settings are trusted, while the user's
personal settings are untrusted.

@c ======================================================================
@node    Game, Level editor, Global score file, Running
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Game
@cindex  game

Heroes has an `INFO' menu, that should describe the different game modes
and options, with pictures and colors.  Please refer to it until this
section is written.

@c ======================================================================
@node    Level editor, Troubleshooting, Game, Running
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Level editor
@cindex  level editor
@cindex  editor

The level editor is available from the `editor' entry in the main menu.
Created levels will be stored in your @file{~/.heroes/levels} directory.

This editor is a cut down version of the one that served us to build all
100 levels of this game.  This one will allow you to construct your own
levels in a quite simplified manner.

On the left side of the screen, you can see a part of your level.  You
can move with keyboard or mouse (read the two next sections).  In the
middle of the screen you can see the set of all the available tiles.
You will pick tiles here to build you level.  And on the right there is
some informations about the level and the selected (orange box) tile.

@menu
* editor-keys::                 Key used in the level editor.
* editor-clicks::               How mouse is used in the editor.
* tunnels::                     How to setup a tunnel.
* sprites::                     How to setup a sprite.
* animations::                  How to setup animations.
* departures::                  How to setup departures.
@end menu

@c ======================================================================
@node    editor-keys, editor-clicks, Level editor, Level editor
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Editor keys
@cindex  editor keys
@cindex  keys, in editor

Here is the list of keys used in the level-editor.  You will have to
learn most of them because most of these actions are available only as
key-bindings.

@table @kbd
@item @key{F3}
Toggle sprite and vehicle display.

@item @key{F5}
Toggle collide tests display.

@item @key{ESC}
Quit and save.

@item @key{Ctrl}-@key{Left}
@itemx @key{Ctrl}-@key{Right}
@itemx @key{Ctrl}-@key{Up}
@itemx @key{Ctrl}-@key{Down}
@itemx @key{Ctrl}-@key{PageUp}
@itemx @key{Ctrl}-@key{PageDown}
@itemx @key{Ctrl}-@key{Home}
@itemx @key{Ctrl}-@key{End}
Move the cursor in the tiles side.

@item @key{Left}
@itemx @key{Right}
@itemx @key{Up}
@itemx @key{Down}
Move the cursor in the level side.

@item @key{SPC}
Copy a tile.

@item @key{d}
Setup starting positions on the selected tile.

@item @key{Ctrl}-@key{f}
Fill the whole level with the selected tile.

@item @key{Meta}-@key{f}
@itemx @key{Alt}-@key{f}
Fill the whole level with the two first tiles (for the 10th set of tiles).

@item @key{p}
Output the level map as a big @file{pcx} file.  The file is saved in the
current directory, and the file name is made by appending @samp{.pcx} to
the level name.

@item @key{s}
Copy a sprite, or remove a sprite.

@item @key{t}
Select the tile for tunnel destination.

@item @key{RET}
View the level map in full screen.

@item @key{Ctrl}-@key{RET}
Play animations.

@end table

@c ======================================================================
@node    editor-clicks, tunnels, editor-keys, Level editor
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Editor clicks
@cindex  editor clicks
@cindex  mouse, in editor

You can select a tiles by clicking on it with the left mouse button.
Keeping this button pulled down will allow you to move the map without using
the keyboard.

The middle button (if you have one) used in the left side will
temporally select a tile, as if you were using the @kbd{t} key.

The right button, used in the left side, will copy a tile to the pointed
tile, in a way it behaves like the space key.

@c ======================================================================
@node    tunnels, sprites, editor-clicks, Level editor
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Tunnels
@cindex  tunnels

Copy your two tiles that are the entrances of your tunnel.  Move the
box-pointer on one, and select it if the @kbd{@key{t}} key (or click on
it with the middle button).  Once you will move the pointer, this tile
will appear in a dashed box.  Move on the second tunnel and click on the
@samp{[GO TO]} box that is on the right of your screen.  Now you have
set up the first way: for now if your were playing on this level you
could go from this place to the dashed one, but from the dashed to this
one.  So you also have to set up the tunnel in the other way: select the
current tiles with @kbd{@key{t}}, move on the former and click on
@samp{[GO TO]}. That's all.

Notice that with this technique you can also typeset some kind of
triangular tunnel. Let @samp{A}, @samp{B}, @samp{C} be the entrances,
you could setup the way like that @samp{A->B}, @samp{B->C}, and
@samp{C->A}.

The coordinate @samp{0x0} if used for the destination denotes a non-setup
way.  That's why you can't put a tunnel on the @samp{0x0} position.


@c ======================================================================
@node    sprites, animations, tunnels, Level editor
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Sprites
@cindex  sprites

With some set of tiles (like the Egyptian one), there are tiles (like
palm trees) designed to be used as `sprites', i.e. put over others with
transparency. You have to use the @kbd{@key{s}} key for this:

@itemize @bullet
@item
copy the ground tile with @kbd{@key{SPC}} or the first button
@item
copy the sprite tile with @kbd{@key{s}} (and if you don't see any sprite on
the level, press @kbd{@key{F3}}).
@end itemize


@c ======================================================================
@node    animations, departures, sprites, Level editor
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Animations
@cindex  animations

You may have noticed that during the game, some tiles are animated:
color cycle (like the speed arrows) or moving objects (ventilators).
Each frame of an animation is actually a separate tile.  The different
tiles of an animations are drawn horizontally in the sets.  To setup an
animation, you just have to select the first one and copy it into your
level.  Optionally, press @kbd{@key{Ctrl}-@key{RET}} to see the animation.
When the orange box is on an animated tile, you should find a button on
the right to modify the speed: the greater the number is, the slower the
animation goes.


@c ======================================================================
@node    departures,  , animations, Level editor
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Departures
@cindex  departures

Select a tile and press the @kbd{@key{d}} key. Then look at the right
side, select a color and click on the arrow you want (if you don't see
any vehicle on the level, press @kbd{@key{F3}}).


@c ======================================================================
@node    Troubleshooting,  , Level editor, Running
@comment node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Troubleshooting
@cindex  troubleshooting

@subsection Video mode
@cindex video mode
@vindex GGI_DISPLAY
@cindex --gfx-options
@cindex X
This game was primary made for MS-DOS, with VGA 320x200x8bits display.
If GGI is used to manage the video modes and you run into trouble with
video modes, I suggest you play with a environment variable called
@samp{GGI_DISPLAY} used to select the display used.  LibGGI come with a file
@file{env.txt} that describes this variable.  As an alternative you may
use heroes' @samp{--gfx-options} option instead of the above variable.  If
you want to force X display, you can add a line
@example
Options: --gfx-options=X
@end example
in your @file{~/.heroes/heroesrc} file.
Note: @samp{--gfx-options} has no effect if you are using SDL.

We suggest you to run the game under X because in console modes (libvga,
frame buffers, ...) it's easy to get stuck if the game freeze.

People using an X server that supports 8bit visuals although the default
visual is not 8bit (run @code{xdpyinfo} to see a list of visuals that
your X server supports) are subject to what is probably a GGI bug.
Basically GGI's X driver fails to allocate the 8bit mode correctly.
The symptom is
@example
X Error of failed request:  BadMatch (invalid parameter attributes)
  Major opcode of failed request:  1 (X_CreateWindow)
  Serial number of failed request:  24
  Current serial number in output stream:  31
@end example
One workaround is to prevent Heroes from negociating a 8bit video mode.
Specify @samp{--gfx-options not8} to that effect.  The default visual
depth for your server will then be selected by GGI.  (Of course this is
slower because Heroes internally works in 8bit mode; use of another
display depth involves a conversion.)

@subsection Keyboard
@cindex keyboard
@cindex keys
@cindex key codes
There is a menu `KEYS' in the submenu `OPTIONS' that lets you change the
key bindings used during the game.  Please set the keys here before
playing since key codes can vary from place to place (hmm...  is that
right?).

@subsection Sound effects
@cindex sound effects
@cindex sfx
@cindex delay
You may find that there is some delay between an action and the
associated sound effect.  This is because libmikmod is polling in a
buffer and is thus always one buffer ahead in the playback. It is
possible to reduce the size of that buffer using some driver parameters,
please see the section `DRIVER PARAMETERS' of libmikmod's @file{README}.  For
instance I'm using the OSS driver and I reduce the size of libmikmod's
buffer by running heroes with the line
@example
Options: -d3,buffer=11,count=4
@end example
in my @file{~/.heroes/heroesrc} file.  If you can find correct values for
other drivers, please send them to @email{duret_g@@epita.fr,me}!

@subsection Sound errors
@cindex sound errors
@cindex errors
If Heroes try to tell you that:
@example
Could not initialize sound, reason: Could not set sample size
@end example
That means that MikMod couldn't setup the 16bits output, may be because
your sound card doesn't support that.  Use the @samp{-8} option to
have the game running with 8bits sound output.


If you get:
@example
Could not initialize sound, reason: Could not set mono/stereo setting
@end example
You will have to run the game with @samp{-m}, because stereo is not
available.

Remember that you can always put these options in your
@samp{~/.heroes/heroes} file (@pxref{heroesrc}) so that you don't need
to type them every time you run the game.

@subsection SegFault when using Alsa drivers with and LibMikMod
@cindex Alsa
@cindex sound errors
@cindex LibMikMod and Alsa

If you are using Alsa 0.5.x drivers@footnote{Alsa is a project to
improve the Linux sound subsystem@*
(See @uref{http://www.alsa-project.org/,the Alsa page} for details).} Heroes
is likely to crash during it's startup.  This is because the current
version of LibMikMod (3.1.9 at the time of writing) lacks support for
Alsa 0.5.

A solution is to run Alsa in OSS-emulation mode: simply run @samp{heroes
-d x} (where x is the OSS driver number printed by @samp{heroes -n}) to
force LibMikMod using its OSS@footnote{Open Sound System is a set of
device drivers that provide a uniform API across all the major UNIX
architectures.  The Linux kernel contain free code from the commercial
OSS (See @uref{http://www.linux.org.uk/OSS/,this page} for details).}
interface.

As a more general solution, you may want to compile LibMikMod without Alsa
support (@samp{./configure --disable-alsa}) so that it never crash
for any application.

@c ======================================================================
@node    heroeslvl, Index, Running, Top
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@chapter @samp{heroeslvl}
@cindex heroeslvl

@samp{heroeslvl} is a tool that can be used to inspect the content of
Heroes level files.  This is of almost no interest to the usual Heroes
player, but can sometime be helpful to find bugs in levels.

@menu
* Invoking heroeslvl::          heroeslvl launch-time options
@end menu

@c ======================================================================
@node    Invoking heroeslvl,  , heroeslvl, heroeslvl
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@section @samp{heroeslvl} options
@cindex Invoking heroeslvl

@samp{heroeslvl} takes a list of levels to inspect in argument, and
support the following options.

When no options are given, @samp{heroeslvl} defaults to @samp{-ipfh}.

@table @samp
@item -v
@itemx --version
@cindex -v
@cindex --version
Display @samp{heroeslvl} version number and copyright informations.

@item -h
@itemx --help
@cindex -h
@cindex --help
Print a help message about these run-time options.

@item -p WHAT
@itemx --print=WHAT
@cindex -p
@cindex --print
Select what information @samp{heroeslvl} should display. @samp{WHAT} can
be one or more of the following characters.

@table @samp
@item d
@cindex -pd
Print square directions.  Square directions are used on tunnel to indicate
the entrance direction, and on speed tiles to indicate the direction of
the acceleration.

@item f
@cindex -pf
Print the filename of each processed file.

@item h
@cindex -ph
Print header information.  This include level size, soundtrack and
tilesets to use, starting positions...

@item i
@cindex -pi
Print tile details.  This will display a list of all tiles, along with
some of their attributes (type of the tile, adress of its sprite,
animation information).

@item t
@cindex -pt
Print square type map.  Display a map of the level, rendering
each square with a character indicating the square type.

@item T
@cindex -pT
Display the character used as type keys in the @samp{-pt} output.

@item w
@cindex -pw
Print wall map.  Display a map of the level, rendering each square with
a character indicating the number of neighboring walls.  (Walls are
just bits indicating the directions that can be used to exit from a
square; they not always map to something visible on the level.)

@item @@
@cindex -p@@
Print the list of tunnels, with position, direction, and destination.

@end table

@item -i
@itemx --indent
@cindex -i
@cindex --indent
Indent everything but the filenames of each level processed.
Note that filenames are only displayed if requested by @samp{-pf}.
@end table

@c ======================================================================
@node    Index,  , heroeslvl, Top
@comment node-name,     next,           previous, up
@chapter Index
@cindex index

@printindex cp

@contents
@bye
